[Docs] Add Expert Parallelism Initial Documentation (#21373)
vllm-project/vllm: docs/serving/expert_parallel_deployment.md

# Expert Parallel Deployment

vLLM supports Expert Parallelism (EP), which allows experts in Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) models to be deployed on separate GPUs, increasing locality, efficiency, and throughput overall.

EP is typically coupled with Data Parallelism (DP). While DP can be used independently of EP, EP is more efficient when used in conjunction with DP. You can read more about data parallelism [here](data_parallel_deployment.md).

## Prerequisites

Before using EP, you need to install the necessary dependencies. We are actively working on making this easier in the future:

1. **Install DeepEP and pplx-kernels**: Set up host environment following vLLM's guide for EP kernels [here](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/tree/main/tools/ep_kernels).
2. **Install DeepGEMM library**: Follow the [official instructions](https://github.com/deepseek-ai/DeepGEMM#installation).

> 3. **For disaggregated serving**: Install UCX and NIXL following the [script](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/blob/main/tools/install_nixl.sh).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **For disaggregated serving**: Install UCX and NIXL following the [script](gh-file:tools/install_nixl.sh).
```

!!! note "Model Support"
    Currently only DeepSeek V3 architecture is supported.

When enabled, vLLM collects load statistics with every forward pass and periodically rebalances expert distribution.

### EPLB Parameters

| Parameter | Description | Default |
|-----------|-------------|---------|
| `--eplb-window-size` | Number of engine steps to track for rebalancing decisions | - |
| `--eplb-step-interval` | Frequency of rebalancing (every N engine steps) | - |
| `--eplb-log-balancedness` | Log balancedness metrics (avg tokens per expert ÷ max tokens per expert) | `false` |
| `--num-redundant-experts` | Additional global experts per EP rank beyond equal distribution | `0` |

### Expert Distribution Formula

- **Default**: Each EP rank has `NUM_TOTAL_EXPERTS ÷ NUM_EP_RANKS` experts
- **With redundancy**: Each EP rank has `(NUM_TOTAL_EXPERTS + NUM_REDUNDANT_EXPERTS) ÷ NUM_EP_RANKS` experts

### Example Command

Single node deployment with EPLB enabled:

```bash
# Single node with EPLB load balancing
VLLM_ALL2ALL_BACKEND=pplx VLLM_USE_DEEP_GEMM=1 vllm serve deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-V3-0324 \
    --tensor-parallel-size 1 \     # Tensor parallelism

>     --data-parallel-size 8 \        # Data parallelism  

Reviewer: My assumption is that 8 DP replicas wouldn't fit in a single node. Perhaps we could include some explanation about why this is possible? (i.e. H200 so lots of memory per GPU? EP reduces each MLP enough? What about Attebntion, isn't that realy big?)

    --enable-expert-parallel \      # Enable EP
    --enable-eplb \                 # Enable load balancer
    --eplb-log-balancedness \       # Log balancing metrics
    --eplb-window-size 1000 \       # Track last 1000 engine steps
    --eplb-step-interval 3000       # Rebalance every 3000 steps
```

For multi-node deployment, add these EPLB flags to each node's command. We recommend setting `--num-redundant-experts` to 32 in large scale use cases so the most popular experts are always available.

## Disaggregated Serving (Prefill/Decode Split)

For production deployments requiring strict SLA guarantees for time-to-first-token and inter-token latency, disaggregated serving allows independent scaling of prefill and decode operations.

### Architecture Overview

- **Prefill Instance**: Uses `deepep_high_throughput` backend for optimal prefill performance
- **Decode Instance**: Uses `deepep_low_latency` backend for minimal decode latency  
- **KV Cache Transfer**: Connects instances via NIXL or other KV connectors

### Setup Steps

> 1. **Install KV Connector**: Install NIXL using the [installation script](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/blob/main/tools/install_nixl.sh)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Install KV Connector**: Install NIXL using the [installation script](gh-file:tools/install_nixl.sh)
```
